README.md, before:


[![Swifty logo](https://github.com/Oyvindkg/swiftydb/blob/swiftydb-2.0-dev/resources/logo.png)](https://github.com/Oyvindkg/swiftydb/blob/swiftydb-2.0-dev/resources/logo.png)

<br>

A typesafe, pure Swift database offering effortless persistence of objects. It draws inspiration from brilliant libraries such as [ObjectMapper](https://github.com/Hearst-DD/ObjectMapper) and [QueryKit](https://github.com/QueryKit/QueryKit) to create a powerfull and easy-to-use database.

<br>

[![CI Status](https://img.shields.io/travis/Oyvindkg/swiftydb/master.svg?style=flat)](https://travis-ci.org/Oyvindkg/swiftydb)
[![Version](https://img.shields.io/cocoapods/v/SwiftyDB.svg?style=flat)](http://cocoapods.org/pods/SwiftyDB)
[![License](https://img.shields.io/cocoapods/l/SwiftyDB.svg?style=flat)](http://cocoapods.org/pods/SwiftyDB)
[![Platform](https://img.shields.io/cocoapods/p/SwiftyDB.svg?style=flat)](http://cocoapods.org/pods/SwiftyDB)

## Content
[Features](#features)<br />
[Usage](#usage)<br />
&emsp; [Using the database](#usingTheDatabase)<br />
&emsp;&emsp; [Retrieving objects](#retrievingObjects)<br />
&emsp;&emsp; [Storing objects](#storingObjects)<br />
&emsp;&emsp; [Deleting objects](#deletingObjects)<br />
&emsp; [Defining objects](#definingObjects)<br />
&emsp; [Migration](#migratingObjects)<br />
&emsp; [Indexing](#indexingObjects)<br />
[Installation](#installation)<br />
[Limitations](#limitations)<br />
[Performance](#performance)<br />
[License](#license)

## <a name="features">Main features</a>
- [x] Store nested objects
- [x] Store array, set, and dictionary type properties
- [x] Asynchronous database access
- [x] Thread safe database operations
- [x] Custom indices
- [x] Migration

## <a name="usage">Usage</a>

### <a name="usingTheDatabase">Access the database</a>

The easiest way to open a database, is simply providing a name for the database.

```Swift
let swifty = Swifty(name: "Westeros")
```

For a more detailed configuration, create a new `Configuration` object, and initiate the database

```Swift
var configuration = Configuration(name: "Westeros")

configuration.databaseDirectory = "~/some/dir"
configuration.dryRun = true

let swifty = Swifty(configuration: configuration)
```

#### <a name="retrievingObjects">Retrieving objects</a>

In order to retrieve all objects of a type from the database, simply call the `get(..)` method with the requested object type as a parameter.
```swift
swifty.get(Stark.self) { result in
  let starks = result.value
}
```

##### Filtering results

Filtering results is really simple due to SwiftyDB's expressive and powerfull query language  
```Swift
swifty.get(Stark.self).filter("name" << ["Sansa", "Arya", "Brandon"]) { result in
  let livingStarks = result.value
}
```
It is also possible to filter results based on their nested objects' identifier
```Swift
let lady  = Wolf(name: "Lady")
let ghost = Wolf(name: "Ghost")

/* Using a storable object in filters is short hand for `<Storable>.<identifier>` */
swifty.get(Stark.self).filter("wolf" == lady || "wolf" == ghost) { result in
  let sansa = result.value
}
```

| Operator | Function                                |
|:--------:|:----------------------------------------|
|    ==    | X is equal Y                            |
|    !=    | X is not equal Y                        |
|    <     | X is less than Y                        |
|    >     | X is greater than Y                     |
|    <=    | X is less than or equal to Y            |
|    >=    | X is greater than or equal to Y         |
|    ~=    | X matches pattern Y                     |
|    !~    | X does not match pattern Y              |
|          |                                         |
|    <<    | X is in Y if Y is an array              |
|    !<    | X is not in Y if Y is an array          |
|    <<    | X is the range of Y if Y is a range     |
|    !<    | X is not the range of Y if Y is a range |
|          |                                         |
|    !     | Negation of X                           |
|    &&    | Conjunction of X and Y                  |
|   \|\|   | Disjunction of X and Y                  |


##### Sorting results

Sorting the results is also possible by using the `sort(.., ascending: ..)` method.
```Swift
swifty.get(Stark.self).sort("name") { result in
  let starks = result.value
}
```

##### Limitig results

To improve the performance of your queries, SwiftyDB offers simple pagination using the `start(..)` and `max(..)` methods. `start(..)` specifies the index of the first included result element, and `max(..)` specifies the maximum number of elements to be retrieved.
```Swift
/* Retrieve 4 starks, skipping the first 2 results */
swifty.get(Stark.self).skip(2).max(4) { result in
  let starks = result.value
}
```

#### <a name="storingObjects">Storing objects</a>
```Swift
let arya = Stark(name: "Arya", age: 9)

swifty.add(arya) { result in 
  if errorMessage = result.errorMessage {
    // Handle errors
  }
}
```

#### <a name="deletingObjects">Deleting objects</a>
```Swift
swifty.delete(Stark.self).filter("name" == "Eddard")
```

### <a name="definingObjects">Defining objects</a>
Any object can be storable by implementing the `Storable` protocol as an extension. This protocol consists of the `Mappable` and `Identifiable` protocols. 

```Swift
struct Stark {
  var name: String
  var wolf: Wolf?
  var age: Int

  init(name: String, age: Int) {
    self.name = name
    self.age  = age
  }
}
```
#### Mappable
Because the dynamic aspects of the Swift language are limited to read operations, this protocol is used to instantiate new objects and populate them with data dynamically.

```Swift
extension Stark: Mappable {
  static func mappableObject() -> Mappable {
    return Stark(name: "", age: 0)
  }
    
  func mapping(map: Map) {
    name <- map["name"]
    age  <- map["age"]
    wolf <- map["wolf"]
  }
}
```

> Inheritance is supported by overriding `mapping(map: Map)` and `mappableObject()` in the subtype. Remember to call `super.mapping(map)`

#### Identifiable
This protocol is used to identify unique objects in the database. This is necessary for the database to keep track of the individual objects and their references. 

`identifier()` should return the name of a property that uniquely identifies an object.

```Swift
extension Stark: Identifiable {
  static func identifier() -> String {
    return "name"
  }
}
```


### <a name="migratingObjects">Migration</a>

If Swifty detects that the properties of a type does not match those stored in the database, it will try to initiate a migration. For a Storable type to be migratable, you must implement the `Migratable` protocol. 

`migrate(..)` instructs Swifty how to map the existing data to the updated properties. Currently, it supports adding, removing, renaming, and changing type.

```swift
extension Stark: Migratable {
  static func migrate(migration: MigrationType) {

    if migration.currentVersion < 2 {
  
      /* Add a new property */
      migration.add("height")
      
      /* Remove an existing property */
      migration.remove("age")
      
      /* Rename an existing property */
      migration.migrate("name").rename("firstName")
      
      /* Change the type of an exsisting property from `String` to `Double` */
      migration.migrate("name").transform(String.self) { stringValue in
        return Double(doubleValue!)
      }
    }
  }
}
```

> When testing your migrations, activate `dryRun` in the database configuration to avoid unwanted changes in the database

### <a name="indexingObjects">Indexing</a>

Creating an index on frequently queried properties can greatly increase thequery performance. Indexing a porperty, or collection of properties, can improve filtering and ordering of results.

```Swift
extension Stark: Indexable {
  static func index(index: IndexType) {
    index.on("age")
    index.on("age").filter("name" << ["Arya", "Sansa"] && "age" > 8)
  }
}
```

## <a name="limitations">Limitations</a>
These are some known limitations of the current version:

- Cannot handle circular references between objects
- It is not possible to query collection properties
- It is not possible to store dictionaries of `Storable` objects

All limitations are ment to be improved as fast as possible. Feel free to contribute 😬

## <a name="performance">Performance</a>

Swifty is created for convenience, not speed. For most applications the performance is more than good enough, but is you are going to add and retrieve thousands of nested objects on a regular basis, this library probably isn't for you. 

Objects with various properties added and retrieved per second

| Hardware | Add with simple properties  | Get with simple properties | Add with collection properties  | Get with collection properties | Add with a nested object | Get with a nested object |
|:---:|:---|:---|:---|:---|:---|:---|
| iPhone 6 | 2500 | 3000 | 1000 | 1000 | 1200 | 1200 |

The performance will be improved in future updates. Until release, the focus will be on functionality

## <a name="installation">Installation</a>

SwiftyDB is available through [CocoaPods](http://cocoapods.org). To install
it, simply add the following line to your Podfile:

```ruby
pod "SwiftyDB", "~>2.0"
```

## Author

Øyvind Grimnes, oyvindkg@yahoo.com

## <a name="License">License</a>

SwiftyDB is available under the MIT license. See the LICENSE file for more info.

Commit message:

README: Updated config with sandbox mode

README.md, after:


[![Swifty logo](https://github.com/Oyvindkg/swiftydb/blob/swiftydb-2.0-dev/resources/logo.png)](https://github.com/Oyvindkg/swiftydb/blob/swiftydb-2.0-dev/resources/logo.png)

<br>

A typesafe, pure Swift database offering effortless persistence of objects. It draws inspiration from brilliant libraries such as [ObjectMapper](https://github.com/Hearst-DD/ObjectMapper) and [QueryKit](https://github.com/QueryKit/QueryKit) to create a powerfull and easy-to-use database.

<br>

[![CI Status](https://img.shields.io/travis/Oyvindkg/swiftydb/master.svg?style=flat)](https://travis-ci.org/Oyvindkg/swiftydb)
[![Version](https://img.shields.io/cocoapods/v/SwiftyDB.svg?style=flat)](http://cocoapods.org/pods/SwiftyDB)
[![License](https://img.shields.io/cocoapods/l/SwiftyDB.svg?style=flat)](http://cocoapods.org/pods/SwiftyDB)
[![Platform](https://img.shields.io/cocoapods/p/SwiftyDB.svg?style=flat)](http://cocoapods.org/pods/SwiftyDB)

## Content
[Features](#features)<br />
[Usage](#usage)<br />
&emsp; [Using the database](#usingTheDatabase)<br />
&emsp;&emsp; [Retrieving objects](#retrievingObjects)<br />
&emsp;&emsp; [Storing objects](#storingObjects)<br />
&emsp;&emsp; [Deleting objects](#deletingObjects)<br />
&emsp; [Defining objects](#definingObjects)<br />
&emsp; [Migration](#migratingObjects)<br />
&emsp; [Indexing](#indexingObjects)<br />
[Installation](#installation)<br />
[Limitations](#limitations)<br />
[Performance](#performance)<br />
[License](#license)

## <a name="features">Main features</a>
- [x] Store nested objects
- [x] Store array, set, and dictionary type properties
- [x] Asynchronous database access
- [x] Thread safe database operations
- [x] Custom indices
- [x] Migration

## <a name="usage">Usage</a>

### <a name="usingTheDatabase">Access the database</a>

The easiest way to open a database, is simply providing a name for the database.

```Swift
let swifty = Swifty(name: "Westeros")
```

For a more detailed configuration, create a new `Configuration` object, and initiate the database

```Swift
var configuration = Configuration(name: "Westeros")

configuration.directory = "~/some/dir"
configuration.mode = .sandbox

let swifty = Swifty(configuration: configuration)
```

#### <a name="retrievingObjects">Retrieving objects</a>

In order to retrieve all objects of a type from the database, simply call the `get(..)` method with the requested object type as a parameter.
```swift
swifty.get(Stark.self) { result in
  let starks = result.value
}
```

##### Filtering results

Filtering results is really simple due to SwiftyDB's expressive and powerfull query language  
```Swift
swifty.get(Stark.self).filter("name" << ["Sansa", "Arya", "Brandon"]) { result in
  let livingStarks = result.value
}
```
It is also possible to filter results based on their nested objects' identifier
```Swift
let lady  = Wolf(name: "Lady")
let ghost = Wolf(name: "Ghost")

/* Using a storable object in filters is short hand for `<Storable>.<identifier>` */
swifty.get(Stark.self).filter("wolf" == lady || "wolf" == ghost) { result in
  let sansa = result.value
}
```

| Operator | Function                                |
|:--------:|:----------------------------------------|
|    ==    | X is equal Y                            |
|    !=    | X is not equal Y                        |
|    <     | X is less than Y                        |
|    >     | X is greater than Y                     |
|    <=    | X is less than or equal to Y            |
|    >=    | X is greater than or equal to Y         |
|    ~=    | X matches pattern Y                     |
|    !~    | X does not match pattern Y              |
|          |                                         |
|    <<    | X is in Y if Y is an array              |
|    !<    | X is not in Y if Y is an array          |
|    <<    | X is the range of Y if Y is a range     |
|    !<    | X is not the range of Y if Y is a range |
|          |                                         |
|    !     | Negation of X                           |
|    &&    | Conjunction of X and Y                  |
|   \|\|   | Disjunction of X and Y                  |


##### Sorting results

Sorting the results is also possible by using the `sort(.., ascending: ..)` method.
```Swift
swifty.get(Stark.self).sort("name") { result in
  let starks = result.value
}
```

##### Limitig results

To improve the performance of your queries, SwiftyDB offers simple pagination using the `start(..)` and `max(..)` methods. `start(..)` specifies the index of the first included result element, and `max(..)` specifies the maximum number of elements to be retrieved.
```Swift
/* Retrieve 4 starks, skipping the first 2 results */
swifty.get(Stark.self).skip(2).max(4) { result in
  let starks = result.value
}
```

#### <a name="storingObjects">Storing objects</a>
```Swift
let arya = Stark(name: "Arya", age: 9)

swifty.add(arya) { result in 
  if errorMessage = result.errorMessage {
    // Handle errors
  }
}
```

#### <a name="deletingObjects">Deleting objects</a>
```Swift
swifty.delete(Stark.self).filter("name" == "Eddard") { result in
  // Handle result
}
```

### <a name="definingObjects">Defining objects</a>
Any object can be storable by implementing the `Storable` protocol as an extension. This protocol consists of the `Mappable` and `Identifiable` protocols. 

```Swift
struct Stark {
  var name: String
  var wolf: Wolf?
  var age: Int

  init(name: String, age: Int) {
    self.name = name
    self.age  = age
  }
}
```
#### Mappable
Because the dynamic aspects of the Swift language are limited to read operations, this protocol is used to instantiate new objects and populate them with data dynamically.

```Swift
extension Stark: Mappable {
  static func mappableObject() -> Mappable {
    return Stark(name: "", age: 0)
  }
    
  func mapping(map: Map) {
    name <- map["name"]
    age  <- map["age"]
    wolf <- map["wolf"]
  }
}
```

> Inheritance is supported by overriding `mapping(map: Map)` and `mappableObject()` in the subtype. Remember to call `super.mapping(map)`

#### Identifiable
This protocol is used to identify unique objects in the database. This is necessary for the database to keep track of the individual objects and their references. 

`identifier()` should return the name of a property that uniquely identifies an object.

```Swift
extension Stark: Identifiable {
  static func identifier() -> String {
    return "name"
  }
}
```


### <a name="migratingObjects">Migration</a>

If Swifty detects that the properties of a type does not match those stored in the database, it will try to initiate a migration. For a Storable type to be migratable, you must implement the `Migratable` protocol. 

`migrate(..)` instructs Swifty how to map the existing data to the updated properties. Currently, it supports adding, removing, renaming, and changing type.

```swift
extension Stark: Migratable {
  static func migrate(migration: MigrationType) {

    if migration.currentVersion < 2 {
  
      /* Add a new property */
      migration.add("height")
      
      /* Remove an existing property */
      migration.remove("age")
      
      /* Rename an existing property */
      migration.migrate("name").rename("firstName")
      
      /* Change the type of an exsisting property from `String` to `Double` */
      migration.migrate("name").transform(String.self) { stringValue in
        return Double(doubleValue!)
      }
    }
  }
}
```

> When testing your migrations, use `.sandbox` mode in the database configuration to avoid unwanted changes in the database

### <a name="indexingObjects">Indexing</a>

Creating an index on frequently queried properties can greatly increase thequery performance. Indexing a porperty, or collection of properties, can improve filtering and ordering of results.

```Swift
extension Stark: Indexable {
  static func index(index: IndexType) {
    index.on("age")
    index.on("age").filter("name" << ["Arya", "Sansa"] && "age" > 8)
  }
}
```

## <a name="limitations">Limitations</a>
These are some known limitations of the current version:

- Cannot handle circular references between objects
- It is not possible to query collection properties
- It is not possible to store dictionaries of `Storable` objects

All limitations are ment to be improved as fast as possible. Feel free to contribute 😬

## <a name="performance">Performance</a>

Swifty is created for convenience, not speed. For most applications the performance is more than good enough, but is you are going to add and retrieve thousands of nested objects on a regular basis, this library probably isn't for you. 

Objects with various properties added and retrieved per second

| Hardware | Add with simple properties  | Get with simple properties | Add with collection properties  | Get with collection properties | Add with a nested object | Get with a nested object |
|:---:|:---|:---|:---|:---|:---|:---|
| iPhone 6 | 2500 | 3000 | 1000 | 1000 | 1200 | 1200 |

The performance will be improved in future updates. Until release, the focus will be on functionality

## <a name="installation">Installation</a>

SwiftyDB is available through [CocoaPods](http://cocoapods.org). To install
it, simply add the following line to your Podfile:

```ruby
pod "SwiftyDB", "~>2.0"
```

## Author

Øyvind Grimnes, oyvindkg@yahoo.com

## <a name="License">License</a>

SwiftyDB is available under the MIT license. See the LICENSE file for more info.
